---
title:  'The impact of planning on creativity'
meta: 
  description: 
  facebook_image: 
  twitter_image: 
---

As a creative person, I find an abundance of inspiration in every nook and cranny of life. I call these instances of inspiration my "muses", a word originating from Greek and Roman mythology where each of the nine daughters of Zeus and Mnemosyne preside over the arts and sciences.

The muse for a creative can serve as a wellspring from which all manner of inspiration pours, fueling the engine of creativity. My career as a web developer was made possible by this very engine, starting with only a moment of serendipitous inspiration while discovering programming at an early age. I wasn't aware at the time that I was fostering a skillset that would serve as the backbone for my career; I was simply inspired to learn and create. 

The muse can also be an albatross, adding undue weight to the shoulders of the creative who has failed to harness its potential for creative output. This is a weight I'm familiar with carrying, having most of my creative endeavors amount to little more than a collection of dust. It's a weight that, perhaps needlessly, reinforces all sorts of negative feelings in my life.

## Inspiration gone stagnant

I’ve become more aware of my relationship with my muses as I attempt to engage with a muse of the past, one that caught my attention so feverishly that my imagination ran wild at the realm of endless possibilities that lie ahead once I begin pursuing it. Well, _should_ I begin pursuing it.

My inspiration was sparked while using [Roam Research](https://roamresearch.com/), a writing tool for networked thought. Roam has drastically changed my approach towards writing, thinking, and learning. I wanted to share my excitement with the world by writing about what Roam has allowed me to do, and how others might also put it to use in their own lives. 

**Alas, I've yet to publish a single piece of writing on this subject, and it's been roughly eight months since my initial stroke of inspiration.**

While I sit at my desk, I notice my inability to put pen to paper, to breathe life into what feels like a lifeless idea, and summon the creative forces necessary to do any more than contemplate how I _might_ do something, rather than actually _do_ it. I stop, push my desire to engage with this idea to the back of my mind, and find something else to do.

{% include atoms/figure.html src='/images/posts/muses/lightbulbs.png' alt='Inspiration fades while stagnation prevails' caption='Inspiration fades while stagnation prevails' %}

## Noticing and questioning the pattern

I’m intimately familiar with this experience; discovering something so inspiring that I want to drop everything to do it, only to fall into a pattern of procrastination that leads me to eventual disinterest.

With more muses left behind than exes [^1], I have a pattern for handling our separation gracefully. I forgo reflecting on the creative impotence that ails me, and after giving me and my muse some space to rekindle our relationship, I decide to call it quits. Neither of us is right or wrong; we simply aren’t meant to be. Although, I must admit that many of these things happen implicitly, placing me in the position of “ghosting” my muse, who certainly deserves more than half-hearted rationalizations about why we’re breaking up. In fact, I deserve more than half-hearted rationalizations.

[^1]: For the record, all of my exes *do not* [live in Texas](https://youtu.be/0KCWqnldEag?t=28) like I'm [George Strait](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Jk7uXaNuWNE).

This relationship between myself and my muses is a pattern, a feedback loop that has so ingrained itself into my psyche that noticing its existence is difficult. Doubt overcomes me as I question whether things have to be this way.

- What muses have I experienced in my life?
- Which muses have I engaged with the most?
  - Which of these have been the most satisfying or rewarding to engage with?
- Which muses have I engaged with the least?
  - Are these muses things I _actually_ wanted to engage with, or did I mindlessly latch onto these whims while riding a creative high?
  - Do I still want to engage with any of these muses?
  - How do I feel as I think about the muses I haven't engaged with?
- What commonalities exist between the muses I’ve engaged with and those I became disinterested in?

I ask myself questions and dig deeper into my past relationships with my muses. I notice a trend occurring, one that shines a light on a likely culprit for my creative misfires over the years, and that culprit is planning.   

## Planning as procrastination

Planning, and the actions that arise from it, are a godsend for some, stacking the proverbial cards such that the impossible becomes possible, and facilitating the accomplishment of what one sets out to do. Planning can work. Hell, it works for me all the time with my client projects.

For others, planning yields little more than perpetual uncertainty and a misguided feeling of accomplishment. When will I begin writing? As soon as I organize a list of tasks to facilitate my writing, rather than simply writing. This is planning over doing; planning as procrastination. 

{% include atoms/figure.html src='/images/posts/muses/chart.png' alt='Planning as procrastination' width='800' %}

Thus, I’ve found myself standing beneath a light shining on my innermost desire for orderliness, guiding my actions towards planning instead of doing. I’ve created no shortage of projects, to-do lists, systems, strategies, plans, timelines, commitments, and goals that are all designed to get me from point A to point B, from idea to creation. Where, then, are my creations?

{% include type/p-large.html content="Planning is a solution to a problem encountered by doing something." %}

Planning as a form of procrastination inhibits my ability to engage in acts of creativity that are engaging and rewarding. Planning is no substitute for doing. To plan is to anticipate, while to do is to create. The former does not preclude the latter, but I'm no longer going to allow planning to impede my creative process.

## Moving forward

<!-- TODO: I want to add a paragraph or two describing *how* I'm going to change my relationships with my muses.
           What are my intentions moving forward? How will I manifest the future I desire? How will I hold myself accountible?
           This will round off my article nicely and make it more powerful. -->

<!-- 
- No more "planning as procrastination" 
- Create first, plan later
  - Write or create in a stream-of-consciousness manner, as I'm feeling inspired
    - This will give me a jumping-off point for the first iteration of whatever I choose to create, which is a step I frequently don't take
      - Once I have something I'm working with, I can try to be diligent about setting aside time to continue working on it and get it to a point where I'm comfortable publishing it

- I will not allow perfectionism to impede my releasing things <- This might be better-suited towards another essay that's more focused on perfectionism. It feels a bit disjointed here
  - I often fall into the trap of things  -->

My new approach is to create first, plan later. I will no longer allow planning to impede my creative process. I will create when I feel inspired to create, and plan only when systematic approaches towards solving problems or accomplishing tasks makes sense. I will no longer rely on planning to put the wind beneath my creative wings.

The benefit of "create first, plan later" is that it helps me jump the first creative hurdle, one that I often don't jump, which is creating the first iteration of whatever I'm inspired to create. This will not only satiate my immediate creative desires, but also give me something to work with going forward; something I can iterate from and improve, perhaps to the point where I feel comfortable releasing it to the public.

While many muses lie in my past, buried beneath the remnants of planning, many more lie ahead. Thankfully, I have had no shortage of muses throughout my life. There will always be something new. The question is, will I engage with it, and if so, how?

**What’s the relationship between you and your muses?**